Lecture 4. The Etymology of English Words
1. The earliest group of English borrowings
 English vocabulary contains an immense number of words of foreign origin.
Explanations for this should be sought in the history of the language which is closely
connected with the history of the nation speaking the language.
 The first century B.C. Most territory now known to us as Europe is occupied
by the Roman Empire. Among the inhabitants of the continent are Germanic tribes,
“barbarians” as the arrogant Romans call them. Theirs is really a rather primitive stage of
development, especially if compared with the high civilization and refinement of Rome.
 It is from the Romans that they learn how to make butter and cheese and, as
there are no words for these foodstuffs in their tribal languages, they are to use the Latin
words to name them. It is also to the Romans that the Germanic tribes owe the
knowledge of some fruits and vegetables, and the Latin names of these fruits and
vegetables enter their vocabularies: cherry, pear, plum, pea, beet, pepper. It is interesting to
note that the word plant is also a Latin borrowing of this period. (By a borrowing or loanword we mean a word which came into the vocabulary of one language from another and
was assimilated by the new language).
 All these Latin words were destined to become the earliest group of borrowings
in the future English language which was built on the basis of the Germanic tribal
languages.
2. Celtic borrowings. The fifth century A.D.
 Several of the Germanic tribes (the most numerous amongst them being the
Angles, the Saxons and the Jutes) migrated across the sea now known as the English
Channel to the British Isles. There they were confronted by the Celts, the original
inhabitants of the Isles. The Celts desperately defended their lands against the invaders.
 Through their numerous contacts with the defeated Celts, the conquerors got to
know and assimilated a number of Celtic words (Modern English bald, down, glen
(лощина), druid (кельтский жрец), bard, cradle (колыбель). Especially numerous among the
Celtic borrowings were place names, names of rivers, hills, etc. Ironically, even the name
of the English capital originates from Celtic.
3. The period of Cristianization. The seventh century A.D.
 This century was significant for the Christianization of England. Latin was the
official language of the Christian church, and consequently the spread of Christianity
was accomplished by a new period of Latin borrowings. These no longer came from
spoken Latin as they did eight centuries earlier, but from church Latin. Also, these new
Latin borrowings were very different in meaning from the earlier ones. They mostly
indicated persons, objects and ideas associated with church and religious rituals. E.g.
priest (священник), bishop (епископ), monk (монах), nun (монахиня), candle (свеча).
 Additionally, there were educational terms. It was quite natural that these were
also Latin borrowings, for the first schools in England were church schools, and the first
teachers – priests and monks. The very word school is a Latin borrowing.
4. The characteristic features of Scandinavian borrowings.
 From the end of the 8th c. to the middle of the 11th c. England underwent several
Scandinavian invasions which left their trace on English vocabulary. Here are some
examples of early Scandinavian borrowings: call v, take v, die v, law n, husband, window, ill.
 Some of the words of this group are easily recognizable as Scandinavian
borrowings by the initial sk- combination. E.g. sky, skill, skin, ski, skirt.
5. Norman French borrowings (1066).
 With the famous Battle of Hastings, when the English were defeated by the
Normans under William the Conqueror, we come to the eventful epoch of the Norman
Conquest. The epoch can be called eventful not only in national, social, political and
human terms, but also in linguistic terms. England became a bi-lingual country, and the
impact on the English vocabulary made over this two-hundred-years period is immense.
French words from the Norman dialect penetrated every aspect of social life. Here is a
brief list of examples of Norman French borrowings.
 Administrative words: state, government, parliament.
 Legal terms: court, judge, justice, crime, prison.
 Military terms: army, war, soldier, officer, enemy.
 Educational terms: pupil, lesson, library, science, pen, pencil.
 Numerous terms of everyday life were also borrowed from French in this period:
e.g. table, plate, saucer, dinner, supper, autumn, uncle, etc.
6. The Renaissance Period.
 In England, as in all European countries, this period was marked by significant
developments in science, art and culture and, also, by a revival of interest in the ancient
civilizations of Greece and Rome and their languages. Hence, there intellig a
considerable number of Latin and Greek borrowings. They were mostly abstract words
(e.g. major, minor, filial (дочерний, сыновний), moderate (умеренный), intelligent, permanent, to
create). There were numerous scientific and artistic terms (datum, status, phenomenon,
philosophy, music). Phenomenon, philosophy, method, music, etc. were borrowed into English
from Latin and had earlier come into Latin from Greek. Greek Renaissance borrowings
are, e.g. atom, cycle, ethics.
 The Renaissance was a period of extensive cultural contacts between the major
European states. Therefore, it was only natural that new words also entered the English
vocabulary from other European languages. The most significant once more were
French borrowings. This time they came from the Parisian dialect of French and are
known as Parisian borrowings. Examples : regime, routine, police, machine, ballet, matinée
(дневное представление), scene, technique, bourgeois, etc.
 Italian also contributed a considerable number of words to English, e.g. piano,
violin, opera, alarm.
* * *
 There are certain structural features which enable us to identify some words as
borrowings and even to determine the source language. We have already established that
the initial sk usually indicates Scandinavian origin. You can also recognize words of
Latin and French origin by certain suffixes, prefixes or endings. (See two tables in the book,
pp. 50 – 51).
7. The Etymological Structure of English Vocabulary
The native element¹ The borrowed element
I. Indo-European element
1. Indo-European element: Family relations: father, mother, brother, son, daughter.
[Abbreviated list for brevity, including the rest of etymology lecture content provided by user]
II. Germanic element: Parts of human body: head, hand, arm, finger, bone.
III. English Proper element.
(And so on up to Lecture 6 and 7 as provided)
...
Lecture 6. Word-Building
1. The main ways of enriching the English vocabulary
...
2. Affixation (or Derivation)
...
3. Semantics of affixes
...
4. Conversion
...
Lecture 7. Word-Building (continued)
1. Composition
...
2. Semi-Affixes
...
3. Shortening (Contraction)
...
4. Some of the minor types of modern word-building.
Onomatopoeia (Sound-imitation)
...
5. Reduplication
...
6. Back-Formation (Reversion)
 The earliest examples of this type of word-building are the verb to beg that was made
from the French borrowing beggar, to burgle from burglar, to cobble from cobbler. In all these
cases the verb was made from the noun by subtracting what was mistakenly
