Lecture 1. The Object of Lexicology
... [I am pasting the content of Lecture 1, 2, and 3 from the user message here]
What’s in a name? that which we call a rose
By any other name would smell as sweet…
(W. Shakespeare. Romeo and Juliet)
Что в имени твоём? То, что зовём мы розой, -
И под другим названьем сохраняло б
Свой сладкий запах!
 (перевод Щепкиной-Куперник)

1. What is lexicology?
 These famous lines reflect one of the fundamental problems of linguistic
research: what is in a name, in a word? Is there any direct connection between a word
and the object it represents? Could a rose have been called by “any other name” as Juliet
says?
 These and similar questions are answered by lexicological research. Lexicology,
a branch of linguistics, is the study of words.
 “Lexicology (from Gr lexis ‘word’ and logos ‘learning’) is the part of linguistics
dealing with the vocabulary of a language and the properties of words as the main units
of language. The term vocabulary is used to denote the system formed by the sum total
of all the words that the language possesses.
 The term word denotes the basic unit of a given language resulting from the
association of a particular meaning with a particular group of sounds capable of a
particular grammatical employment. A word therefore is simultaneously a semantic,
grammatical and phonological unit.”
(I. Arnold, Lexicology, p.9)
 We do not know much about the origin of language and, consequently, of the
origin of words. We know almost nothing about the mechanism by which a speaker’s
mental process is converted into sound groups called “words”, nor about the reverse
process whereby a listener’s brain converts the acoustic phenomena into concepts and
ideas, thus establishing a two-way process of communication.
 We know very little about the nature of relations between the word and the
referent (i.e. object, phenomenon, quality, action, etc. denoted by the word). If we
assume that there is a direct relation between the word and the referent it gives rise to
another question: how should we explain the fact that the same referent is designated by
quite different sound groups in different languages.
 We do know by now that there is nothing accidental about the vocabulary of
the language (the total sum of its words); that each word is a small unit within a vast,
efficient and perfectly balanced system.
 What do we know about the nature of the word?
 First, we know that the word is a unit of speech which serves the purposes of
human communication. Thus, the word can be defined as a unit of communication.
 Secondly, the word can be perceived as the total of the sounds which
comprise it.
 Third, the word, viewed structurally, possesses several characteristics.
2. The structure of the word
 The modern approach to word studies is based on distinguishing between the
external and the internal structures of the word.
 By external structure of the word we mean its morphological structure. For
example, in the word post-impressionists the following morphemes can be distinguished:
the prefixes post-, im-, the root press, the noun-forming suffixes -ion, -ist, and the
grammatical suffix of plurality -s. All these morphemes constitute the external structure
of the word post-impressionists.
 The internal structure of the word, or its meaning, is commonly referred to as
the word’s semantic structure. This is the word’s main aspect. Words can serve the
purposes of human communication solely due to their meanings.
 The area of lexicology specializing in the semantic studies of the word is called
semantics.
 Another structural aspect of the word is its unity. The word possesses both
external (or formal) unity and semantic unity. Formal unity of the word is sometimes
interpreted as indivisibility. The example of post-impressionists has already shown that the
word is not indivisible. Yet, its component morphemes are permanently linked together
in opposition to word-groups, both free and with fixed contexts, whose components
possess a certain structural freedom, e.g. bright light, to take for granted.
 The formal unity of the word can best be illustrated by comparing a word and a
word-group comprising identical constituents. The difference between a blackbird and a
black bird is explained by their relationship with the grammatical system of the language.
The word blackbird, which is characterized by unity, possesses a single grammatical
framing: blackbird/s. The first constituent black is not subject to any grammatical
changes. In the word-group a black bird each constituent can acquire grammatical forms
of its own: the blackest birds I’ve ever seen. Other words can be inserted between the
components: a black night bird.
 The same example may be used to illustrate what we mean by semantic unity.
 In the word-group a black bird each of the meaningful words conveys a separate
concept: bird – a kind of living creature; black – a color.
 The word blackbird conveys only one concept: the type of bird. This is one of the
main features of any word: it always conveys one concept, no matter how many
component morphemes it may have in its external structure.
 A further structural feature of the word is its susceptibility to grammatical
employment. In speech most words can be used in different grammatical forms in which
their interrelations are realized.
 All that we have said about the word can be summed up as follows.
 The word is a speech unit used for the purposes of human communication,
materially representing a group of sounds, possessing a meaning, susceptible to
grammatical employment and characterized by formal and semantic unity.
3. The main problems of lexicology
 Two of these have been already underlined. The problem of word-building is
associated with prevailing morphological word-structures and with processes of making
new words. Semantics is the study of meaning. Modern approaches to this problem are
characterized by two different levels of study: syntagmatic and paradigmatic.
 On the syntagmatic level, the semantic structure of the word is analyzed in its
linear relationships with neighboring words in connected speech. In other words, the
semantic characteristics of the word are observed, described and studied on the basis of
its typical contexts.
 On the paradigmatic level, the word is studied in its relationships with other
words in the vocabulary system. So, a word may be studied in comparison with other
words of similar meaning. E.g. work n – labour n. Work работа, труд; 1 the job that a
person does especially in order to earn money. This word has many meanings (in Oxford
Dictionary – 14), many synonyms and idioms [`idiemz]: creative work творческая
деятельность; public work общественные работы; his life`s work дело его жизни;
dirty work (difficult, unpleasant) 1 чёрная работа; 2 грязное дело, подлость. Nice work!
Отлично! Здорово! Saying (поговорка): All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy
(мешай дело с бездельем, проживёшь век с весельем) – it is not healthy to spend all
your time working; you need to relax too.
 Labour: “work” и “labour” не взаимозаменимы; labour – 1 work, especially
physical work: manual labour, a labour camp – исправительно-трудовой лагерь; 2 people
who work: a shortage of labour; cheap labour; skilled labour – квалифицированные рабочие,
Labour Party; labour relations; a labour of Sisyphus; Sisyphean labour [,sisi‘fi:en] сизифов
труд; тяжёлый и бесплодный труд – of a task impossible to complete. From the Greek
myth in which Sisyphus was punished for the bad things he had done in his life with the
never-ending task of rolling a large stone to the top of a hill, from which it always rolled
down again.
 Other words of similar meaning (e.g. to refuse v – to reject v), of opposite meaning
(e.g. busy adj – idle adj; to accept v – to reject v), of different stylistic characteristics (e.g. man n
– chap n – bloke n – guy n). Man – chap (coll.) – парень, малый; a good chap – славный
малый; old chap – старина; chap – BrE, informal, becoming old-fashioned – used to
talk about a man in a friendly way: He isn`t such a bad chap really. Bloke (coll.) тип, парень:
He seemed like a nice bloke. Guy – coll. US – малый; tough guy железный малый; wise
guy умник; guys (informal, especially US) a group of people of either sex: Come on, you guys!
 Consequently, the main problems of paradigmatic studies are synonymy,
antonymy, functional styles.
4. Phraseology
 Phraseology is the branch of lexicology specializing in word-groups which are
characterized by stability of structure and transferred meaning, e.g. to take the bull by the
horns, to see red, birds of a feather, etc.
5. Vocabulary as a system
 One further important objective of lexicological studies is the study of the
vocabulary of a language as a system. The vocabulary can be studied
synchronically, that is, at a given stage of its development, or diachronically, that is, in
the context of the processes through which it grew, developed and acquired its modern
form.
Lecture 2 Informal Style
1. Functional style
 The social context in which the communication is taking place determines the
modes of speech. When placed in different situations, people instinctively choose
different kinds of words and structures to express their thoughts. The suitability or
unsuitability of a word for each particular situation depends on its stylistic characteristics
or, in other words, on the functional style it represents. Professor I.V. Arnold defines it
as “a system of expressive means peculiar to a specific sphere of communication”.
 By the sphere of communication we mean the circumstances attending the
process of speech in each particular case: professional communication, a lecture, an
informal talk, a formal letter, an intimate letter, a speech in court, etc.
 All these circumstances or situations can be classified into two types: formal (a
lecture, a speech in court, an official letter, professional communication) and informal
(an informal talk, an intimate letter).
 Accordingly, functional styles are classified into two groups, with further
subdivisions depending on different situations.
2. Informal style
 Informal vocabulary is used in one’s immediate circle: family, relatives, or friends.
One uses informal words when at home or feeling at home.
 Informal style is relaxed, free-and-easy and familiar. But it should be pointed out
that the informal talk of well-educated people considerably differs from that of the
illiterate or the semi-educated; the choice of words with adults is different from the
vocabulary of teenagers; people living in the provinces use certain regional words and
expressions. Consequently, the choice of words is determined in each particular case not
only by an informal (or formal) situation, but also by the speaker’s educational and
cultural background, age group, and his occupational and regional characteristics.
 Informal words and word-groups are divided into three types: colloquial, slang
and dialect words and word-groups.
3. Colloquial words
 Among other informal words, colloquialisms are used by everybody, and their
sphere of communication is comparatively wide, at least of literary colloquial words.
These are informal words that are used in everyday conversational speech both by
cultivated and uneducated people of all age groups. The sphere of communication of
literary colloquial words also include the printed page.
 Vast use of informal words is one of the prominent features of 20th century
English and American literature. It is quite natural that informal words appear in
dialogues in which they realistically reflect the speech of modern people.
 However, in modern fiction informal words are not restricted to conversation in
their use, but frequently appear in descriptive passages as well. In this way the narrative
is endowed with conversational features. The author creates an intimate, warm, informal
atmosphere.
“Fred Hardy was a bad lot (пользовался дурной славой). Pretty women and an unlucky
knack for backing the wrong horse had landed him in the bankruptcy court by the time he
was twenty-five…” (From W.S. Maugham).
 Here are some more examples of literary colloquial words. Pal (кореш, друг) and
chum (приятель, дружок) are colloquial equivalents of friend; girl, when used colloquially,
denotes a woman of any age; bite and snack (quick meal – перекусить) stand for meal; hi, hello
are informal greetings, and so long a form of parting; start, go on, finish and be through
(покончить) are also literary colloquialisms.
 A considerable number of shortenings are found among words of this type. E.g.
pram, exam, fridge, flu, zip, movie.
 Verbs with post-positional adverbs are also numerous among colloquialisms: put
up, put over, make up, make out, turn up, etc.
 Literary colloquial words are to be distinguished from familiar colloquial and
low colloquial.
 The borderline between the literary and familiar colloquial is not always clearly
marked. Yet the circle of speakers using familiar colloquial is more limited: these words
are used mostly by the young and the semi-educated. This vocabulary group closely
verges on slang and has something of its coarse flavour.
 E.g. doc (for doctor), ta-ta (for good-bye), to kid smb.(for tease, banter – подшутить), to
pick up smb. (for make a qick and easy acquaintance), shut up (for keep silent).
 Low colloquial (просторечие) is defined as uses characteristic of the speech of
persons who may be broadly described as uncultivated. This group is stocked with
words of illiterate (неграмотный) English which do not present much interest for our
purposes.
 The problem of functional styles is not one of purely theoretical interest, but
represents a particularly important aspect of the language-learning process. Students
often misunderstand the term “colloquial” and use it for “conversational”. The
marker “colloquial” is a sign of restricted usage – not in formal circumstances or in
reports. But literary colloquial words should be included in functional vocabulary,
presented and drilled in suitable contexts and situations, mainly in dialogues. It is
important to associate these words with informal, relaxed situations.
4. Slang
 The Oxford English Dictionary defines slang as “language of a highly colloquial
style, considered as below the level of standard educated speech, and consisting either of
new words or of current words employed in some special sense.”
 All or most slang words are current words whose meanings have been
metaphorically shifted. Each slang metaphor is rooted in a joke, but not in a kind or
amusing joke. This is the criterion for distinguishing slang from colloquialisms: most
slang words are metaphors and jocular, often with a coarse, mocking, cynical colouring.
 Then why do people use slang?
 For a number of reasons. To be picturesque, arresting, striking and, above all,
different from others. To demonstrate one’s spiritual independence and daring. To
sound “modern” and “up-to-date”.
 It doesn’t mean that all these aims are achieved by using slang. But these are the
main reasons for using it.
 The circle of users of slang is more narrow than that of colloquialisms. It is
mainly used by the young and uneducated.
5. Dialect words
 Dialect is a variety of a language which prevails in a district, with local
peculiarities of vocabulary, pronunciation and phrase. England is a small country, yet it
has many dialects which have their own distinctive features (e.g. the Lancashire,
Dorsetshire, Norfolk dialects).
 So dialects are regional forms of English. Standard English is defined as the
language as it is written and spoken by literate people in both formal and informal usage
and that is universally current while incorporating regional differences.
 Dialectal peculiarities, especially those of vocabulary, are constantly being
incorporated into everyday colloquial speech or slang. From these levels they can be
transferred into the common stock, i.e. words which are not stylistically marked and a
few of them even into formal speech and into the literary language. Car, trolley, tram
began as dialect words. Some examples of dialects: tha (thee) – the objective case of thou;
brass – money; nivver – never; nowt – nothing.
Colloquial words. Examples with translations
some sort of вроде бы в
put sb. through доставать, мучить
keep up продолжать
cope with справиться
stuff дело
chuck = give up бросить
a bad lot (old-fashioned) – a dishonest person плохая репутация, дурная слава
knack for backing = knack умение, сноровка; unlucky knack невезение;
back the wrong horse (idiom) поставить не на ту лошадь (т.е. ошибиться, сделать
плохой выбор, просчитаться)
landed him in = to land sb in sth (informal) – to get sb into a difficult situation
bankruptcy court суд по делам о несостоятельности
to have a good time хорошо проводить время
ups and downs (of fortune) взлёты и падения; превратности судьбы
damn it чёрт возьми/подери
old buffer (bloke, card, codger) (пренебрежительно) старый хрыч, старикашка peg
out выдохнуться, выйти из игры
by George! Чёрт возьми! Ей богу!
to be through: She was through with him – она покончила с ним
put up: 1 поднять – Put your hands up! 2 to show a particular level of skill: The team
put up a great performance – played very well
put over передавать
Lecture 3. Formal Style
1. Learned words
 Formal style is restricted to formal situations. In general, formal words fall into
two main groups: words associated with professional communication and a less
exclusive group of so-called learned words.
 These words are mainly associated with the printed page. It is in this vocabulary
stratum that poetry and fiction find their main resources.
 We find here numerous words that are used in scientific prose and can be
identified by their dry, matter-of-fact flavour (e.g. comprise, experimental, heterogeneous,
homogeneous, conclusive, divergent, etc).
 To this group also belongs so-called ‘officialese’ (канцеляризмы). These are the
words of the official, bureaucratic language. They should be avoided in speech and in
print, e.g. assist (for help), endeavour (for try), proceed (for go), approximately (for about),
sufficient (for enough), inquire (for ask).
 Probably the most interesting subdivision of learned words is represented by the
words found in descriptive passages of fiction. These words, which may be called
‘literary’, also have a particular flavour of their own, usually described as ‘refined’. They
are mostly polysyllabic words drawn from the Romance language and, though fully
adapted to the English phonetic system, some of them continue to sound singularly
foreign. Here are some examples: solitude=loneless, lonely place (уединение, одиночество),
sentiment=feeling (чувство), fascination=strong attraction (очарование, обаяние), delusion
(заблуждение), meditation (размышление), cordial=friendly (сердечный, радушный).
 There is one further subdivision of learned words: modes of poetic diction.
These stand close to the previous group many words from which, in fact, belong to both
these categories. Yet, poetic words have a further characteristic – a lofty, sometimes
archaic, colouring: “Alas! (увы) they had been friends in youth;
But wispering tongues can poison truth
And constancy (постоянство) lives in realms (царства) above;
And life is thorny; and youth is vain…
 Though learned words are mainly associated with the printed page, this is not
exclusively so. Any educated English-speaking individual is sure to use many learned
words not only in his formal letters and professional communication but also in his
everyday speech. Educated people in both modern fiction and real life use learned words
quite naturally and their speech is richer for it.
 On the other hand, excessive use of learned words in conversational speech
presents grave hazards. Utterances overloaded with such words have pretensions of
‘refinement’ and ‘elegance’ but achieve the exact opposite verging on the absurd and
ridiculous.
 Writers use this phenomenon for stylistic purposes. When a character in a book
or in a play uses too many learned words, the obvious inappropriateness of his speech in
an informal situation produces a comic effect.
 However any suggestion that learned words are suitable only for comic purposes,
would be quite wrong. It is in this vocabulary stratum that writers and poets find their
most vivid paints and colours, and not only their humorous effects. Without knowing
some learned words, it is even impossible to read fiction (not to mention scientific
articles) or to listen to lectures in the foreign language.
 It is also true that some of these words should be carefully selected and
“activized” to become part of the students’ functional vocabulary.
2. Archaic and obsolete words
 Archaic – are old and no longer used words; obsolete – no longer used because
something new was invented. Obsolete words have completely gone out of use.
 Archaic and obsolete words stand close to the “learned” words, particularly to
the modes of poetic diction. Learned words and archaisms are both associated with the
printed page. Yet, many learned words may also be used in conversational situations.
This cannot happen with archaisms, which are restricted to the printed page. These
words are moribund, already partly or fully out of circulation. Their last refuge is in
historical novels and in poetry which is rather conservative in its choice of words.
 Thou [θаu] – (ты) and thy [ðai] – (твой), aye [ai] – (‘yes’) and nay [nei] – (‘no’) are
certainly archaic and long since rejected by common usage, yet poets use them even
today.
 Numerous archaisms can be found in Shakespeare, but it should be taken in
consideration that what appear to us today as archaisms in the works of Shakespeare, are
in fact examples of everyday language of Shakespeare`s time.
 Further examples of archaisms are: morn (for morning), eve (for evening), errant (for
wandering, e.g. errant knights), etc.
 Sometimes an archaic word may undergo a sudden revival. So, the formerly
archaic kin (for relatives; one`s family) is now current in American usage.
3. Professional terminology
 Hundreds of thousands of words belong to special scientific, professional or
trade terminological systems and are not used or even understood by people outside the
particular speciality. Every field of modern activity has its specialized vocabulary, and
similarly special terminologies for psychology, music, management, finance, economics,
jurisprudence, linguistics and many others.
 Term, as traditionally understood, is a word or a word-group which is
specifically employed by a particular branch of science, technology, trade or the
arts to convey a concept peculiar to his particular activity.
 So, share, bank, balance sheet are finance terms; court, lawyer, civil law are legal terms;
and top manager, creative team, motivation are used in management.
 There are several controversial problems in the field of terminology. The first is
the question whether a term loses its terminological status when it comes into common
usage. Today this is a frequent occurrence, as various elements of the media of
communication (TV, radio, magazines, etc.) ply people with scraps of knowledge from
different scientific fields, technology and the arts. It is quite natural that under
circumstances numerous terms pass into general usage without losing connection with
their specific fields.
 There are linguists in whose opinion terms are only those words which have
retained their exclusiveness and are not known or recognized outside their specific
sphere. From this point of view, words associated with the medical sphere, such as unit
(доза лекарственного препарата), theatre (операционная), contact (носитель инфекции) are no
longer medical terms as they are in more or less common usage.
 There is yet another point of view, according to which any terminological system
is supposed to include all the words and word-groups conveying concept peculiar to a
particular branch of knowledge, regardless of their exclusiveness. Modern research of
various terminological systems has shown that there is no impenetrable wall between
terminology and the general language system. To the contrary, terminologies seem to
obey the same rules as other vocabulary strata. Therefore, exchange between
terminological systems and the “common” vocabulary is quite normal, and it would be
wrong to regard a term as something “special” and standing apart.
 Two other controversial problems deal with polysemy and synonymy.
According to some linguists, an “ideal” term should be monosemantic (i.e. it should
have only one meaning). Polysemantic terms may lead to misunderstanding, and that is
a serious shortcoming in professional communication. This requirement seems quite
reasonable, yet facts of the language do not meet it. There are numerous polysemantic
terms. In the terminology of painting, the term colour may denote hue (цвет) and, at the
same time, stuff used for colouring (краска).
 The same is true about synonymy in terminological systems. There are scholars
who insist that terms should not have synonyms because, consequently, scientists and
other specialists would name the same objects and phenomena in their field by different
terms and would not be able to come to any agreement. This may be true. But, in fact,
terms do possess synonyms.
4. Basic vocabulary
 These words are stylistically neutral, and, in this respect, opposed to formal and
informal words. Their stylistic neutrality makes it possible to use them in all kinds of
situations, both formal and informal, in verbal and written communication. Certain of
the stylistically marked vocabulary strata are exclusive: professional terminology is used
mostly by representatives of the professions; dialects are regional; slang is favoured
mostly by the young and the uneducated. Not so basic vocabulary. These words are used
every day, everywhere and by everybody, regardless of profession, occupation,
educational level, age group or geographical location. These are words without which no
human communication would be possible as they denote objects and phenomena of
everyday importance (e.g. house, bread, summer, child, mother, difficult, to go, etc.).
 The basic vocabulary is the central group of the vocabulary, its historical
foundation and living core. That is why words of this stratum show a considerably
greater stability in comparison with words of the other strata, especially informal.
 Basic vocabulary words can be recognized not only by their stylistic neutrality
but, also, by lack of other connotations (i.e. attendant meanings). Their meanings are
broad, general and directly convey the concept, without supplying any additional
information.
 For instance, the verb to walk means merely ‘to move from place to place on foot’
whereas in the meanings of its synonyms to stride (шагать), to stroll (прогуливаться), to trot
(семенить, бежать вприпрыжку), to stagger – to sway while walking (идти шатаясь) and others,
some additional information is encoded as they each describe a different manner of
walking, a different gait, tempo, purpose or lack of purpose. Thus, to walk, with its direct
broad meaning, is a typical basic vocabulary word, and its synonyms, with their
additional information encoded in their meanings, belong to the periphery of the
vocabulary.
 The basic vocabulary and the stylistically marked strata of the vocabulary do not
exist independently but are closely interrelated. Most stylistically marked words have
their neutral counterparts in the basic vocabulary.
 The table gives some examples of such synonyms belonging to different stylistic
strata.
 Basic vocabulary Informal Formal
 begin start, get started commence
 continue go on, get on proceed
 end finish, be through, be over terminate
 child, baby kid, brat, bearn (dial.) infant, babe (poet.)
 The basic vocabulary words comprise the first and essential part of the students’
functional and recognition vocabulary. They constitute the beginner’s vocabulary. Yet, to
restrict to the basic vocabulary would mean to deprive the speech of colour, expressive
force and emotive shades, for, if basic words are absolutely necessary, they also
decidedly lack something: they are not at all the kind of words to tempt a writer or a
poet. Actually, if the language had none other but basic vocabulary words, fiction would
be hardly readable, and poetry simply non-existent.
